Maxine was kind of, Maxine Davenport, Emmanuel's
then wife, was kind of den mother to the philosophy
department. And we all had parties. Every weekend
we had parties. And they were lovely long parties
where there was a lot of drinking going on. And
people brought their kids and they set them out in
play pens under the trees. And around 6 o'clock
somebody would go out for fried chicken. And
sometimes a party would last from noon until 2 in
the morning. And we would talk about
philosophical issues and literary issues as well
as local things. In fact, more than local things.
And so it was really a good time. There were always,
it was not just the 10 of us, because each of these
people had an attachment. It was other people who
were interested in philosophy. I
would say there would be about 16 at each of these
things.
And this went on for quite a while. And Manuel
Davenport was very enthusiastic about kind of
philosophy for ordinary people. That was his
shtick.
So we would get in really good discussions in which
everyone took part, as opposed to now you get to a
philosophy group and it's always very
specialized, the discussion, so people cannot
participate unless they are, unless they know the
language, walk the walk, talk the talk, and so
forth. It wasn't that way then. It was open
discussion. Anybody who had an interest could
easily get into the discussion. Manuel did
interesting things. For instance, he joined
Mensa. And then he suggested to Hugh that Hugh
would be an appropriate member for Mensa, too. And
so I got irritated and I said, well, what about me?
I'm going to join this group, too. So we went down to
Austin to take the intelligence test, which was
really goofy. And we joined Mensa. And then Manuel
had Mensa parties. And these were really fun.
There would be a couple of Aggies, sometimes in
uniform. There would be... some brilliant person
who never had a chance to get out of a restrictive
life. There would be a handful of people from the
university, and these people would go over to his
house and provide refreshments, and we'd talk
about stuff. So this was kind of when the
philosophy department got a little bit tired of
one another. And this was a way of refreshing it.
But one thing I noticed is that he always had these
chess sets and so forth set out so that anybody who
wanted to can indulge in this kind of thing. But
nobody ever touched any of this stuff. There were
puzzles, chess sets. People just talked. And
there was gossip, too, at these things. I didn't
think they were that much different from the
regular philosophy parties. But there was less
alcohol because there were students. I think we
had beer. And that was it. Manuel always had some
project. He did a lot of work for the BCLU. He was
active in the Unitarian Church. He was a wonderful
auctioneer. They were always auctioning stuff
off for benefits. And Manuel was just great at
that. And so I remember those first few years
actually in a kind of beery haze, but very
pleasantly. was manual at the helm of the
philosophy department and officially he was the
department head did he operate as a department
head or department chair he operated as a
department chair because he did everything
democratically uh...
and now that i believe that was an all anglo male
department yes it was it was indeed right now back
over then you in the english department When did
you and your husband begin to be invited to English
department events? Well, that's hard to say
because they didn't have, they didn't party.
For one thing, there was a much greater age spread.
I guess there was an age spread in philosophy, too,
actually, from Becca... to Hugh, but there wasn't
such an age spread as there was in English. Some
people always invited me to their parties. Harry
Kreuter, for instance. I guess I would generalize
and say that people who were having wild parties
included me in. Philosophy department parties
had a reputation, so they figured that I'd be a game
for their parties, too. But the older faculty
members did not have these parties. They had
dinners with their friends, and they didn't
socialize throughout the department. Did you
have any impression of President Earl Rudder? If
so, please describe. I never... In fact, there was
one... One of the things that philosophy people
used to do was to get together on Friday afternoons
at a restaurant, and there was one that Earl Rudder
was going to join us, but he didn't. Something came
up at the last minute, so I never met the man. Other
than that... But you must have seen him at some
campus events where he presided. I didn't usually
attend these events then. Anything whole campus,
I usually steered clear of and still do if I
possibly can. But
I remember thinking it was interesting that a
military man should be in that post. and that this
place was really very military. There was a lot of
junk going on then. For instance, the Memorial
Student Center grass, there were actually fights
having to do with walking on the grass. I was kind of
anti-military. I participated in the
moratorium, but I didn't really connect this
anti-military feeling about the war to Rutter
because, of course, that wasn't his war. So I would
say I did not really have much of an impression of
them. Did you notice early on Aggie traditions?
Oh, yes. Which ones? Well, first of all, there was
the business about the lawn. Then there was
Bonfire. I attended Bonfire at that time. There
was... When we passed on heads to David Stewart...
David Stewart had the, for some reason, the urge to
kind of force traditions on everybody. He made
people go to Yale practice, for instance. I
thought Yale practice a totally disgusting
tradition. It's kind of funny that I should have
participated in so many parties
and not like Yale practice, but Yale practice
seemed to me just out of control.
There was an article in the Texas Observer about
the core some years ago. And I remember reading
that. This was very anti-core,
really. But it had all the pictures of all the
traditions. And I remember thinking, gee, this is
really a crazy place to be. But I was never either
strongly for or I was not an anti-tradition
person. On the other hand, there are quite a few
traditions that I didn't really buy into.
All right. Jack Williams came as president in late
1970. Did you see him, form an impression of him in
his early years?
I do remember him.
But the fact of the matter is that the presidency of
the university and the chancellor seemed so
remote for me that I didn't... I was interested in
the administration up so far as the dean. After
that, it didn't matter to me. Your impression of
the dean? Yeah. Okay. Well, let's see. Which dean
are we talking about? Maxwell. I like Maxwell very
much. Why? Maxwell was a very humane person. And
one of the things he did, I don't know if you're
going to want to leave this on or not, but I'm going
to say it. One of the things he did was to collect up
drunken professors in his truck and return them to
their homes before they could do too much damage to
themselves or for that matter. What do you mean if
they were at a party or something? If they were at
bars and he would get a call and he'd go out with his
red truck and pick this guy up and haul him home. He
was the person who was responsible for my staying
and not getting the boot when all of a sudden this
place got into the notion of competitive
competition and making sure that only scholars
were in the English department and this sort of
thing. And Maxwell made it clear to Stuart that I
was in. Now, when did you become a full-time
faculty member? Well, see, that's what's
strange. I was hired as an instructor, and then I
was hired annually as an instructor. And then I was
demoted to lecturer about three years after I
was... And this, Maxwell did this. He demoted all
of us, everybody, except me, however, who was
demoted, was a student.
And then Harrison
Hurth was head. And Harrison said, well, why don't
you finish your PhD? And then we could keep you. So I
did. I went back to Pitt. It only took me about six
months. I got the thing out of the way and got the
degree. And so I was put back on the tenure track.
Now, this is in the 70s. Yes. I was put back on the
tenure track, I believe, in 75. I got the degree in
74.
But I don't remember the sequence. What I don't
have is the sequence of who was department head
when. I know that Hearth was very supportive to me
and Dave Stewart was not. In fact, the first thing
he did was to rail at me. He called me in when he took
over. And he railed at me that my file in his office
had nothing in it. That is, there was no dossier,
there was no recommendation, there was nothing.
He said, where are you from? This is an empty
folder. And I said, well, you know, I didn't put
together the folder. So then I collected up all the
stuff that he wanted in it. But he seemed to think
that I had done something wrong. some terrible
thing, put something over on him that I probably
really didn't have a master's from the University
of Pittsburgh at all. But we collected the stuff
and we got it together. And Stuart's and my
relationship was not ever wonderful. And by then
you're teaching what courses? I'm still teaching
the same courses. I taught those same courses.
There weren't any other courses. Mm-hmm. on the
undergraduate level there were just a handful of
specialized courses and I didn't start teaching
I'm trying to remember there was all of a sudden a
tremendous surge in courses
and then of course I taught all kinds of courses but
I was on the undergraduate committee for a while,
for instance, and it was murder to get a course
through there. You couldn't, you know, people
would put courses through two or three years in a
row, and they would be stopped. In the department?
In the department, yeah. What was the reason for
their being... I don't remember.
But it wasn't just yours, that's... I didn't offer
courses. I was on the undergraduate committee
that looked at these course proposals. And the
head
would say, no, we can't use this one because,
because, and nothing would go through. And then
all of a sudden, it was whatever you want. Under
Jack Williams, the female enrollment exploded
upward, and so did the totals. How did this prevent
that from happening? OK. There were, they hired a
lot of
lecturers.
When was this? In the 70s. In the 70s. What part of
the 70s? See, when he came in, he came here in 1971.
Okay. First time women were admitted to the
undergrad program without any instruction.
Yeah, okay. At one point, they had a dean. Her name
was Toby Schreiber, right?
She used to have, certainly looked like tea
parties, in the bottom of, now what is the name of
that building? The Y?
No, the building with the glass bottom. It's new,
relatively new. It's got two parts.
One is sixth floor and has the dean on top, and then
the... It's just... Oh, Harrington. Yeah, right,
okay. She used to have these tea parties in
Harrington. You'd see her in there with all these
women drinking tea. So the editing of women. Then,
after there were many women, I started to get women
coming to me with problems.
The explosion of students resulted in the hiring
of a lot of lecturers, and we had just... What was
interesting too is that I was then demoted, but the
lecturers, the male lecturers, made more money
than the women.
Even if many of them were there for only one year,
and some of them were really strange people. You
had the feeling that somebody went out with a van
and hauled in lecturers. But these people would
come and go, and I was there, and then...
I don't know how it affected me personally, except
that I had more people in my classes, and there were
more women, and I did have women asking me
questions other than that. You said women asking
you questions came for advice. About what? What
were the matters that women... It came to me about
being harassed by male students. That was the
biggest one. And then sexism in classrooms. And
there were some people who were taught in such a way
as to be really insulting to women. And some of
them, I think, didn't even think about it. They'd
just been doing this. They made the same jokes. For
instance, they would joke about rape all the time.
The women didn't like that. And women came to ask
me, what should they do?
How should they deal with either sexist
instructors or student harassment? What advice
did you give them? It depended on the case. In one or
two cases, I recommended that the student drop the
course. I recommended that complaints be written
to deans and this course be dropped. I don't know.
She did drop the class. I don't know whether she
complained or not. The students that were being
harassed, I recommended that
in one case that legal action be taken. In other
cases, when it wasn't severe, I just told her to be a
little bit more assertive about telling the guy to
get lost. Were there some people in that era that
you consider very positive in their sensitivity
to women's matters? In the department, let's see.
Hmm.
Well, there was Stanley Archer, who was always
able to figure out the right thing to do and do it.
Now, is he deceased? Yes. Oh, boy. He died, yeah,
and he would have been a wonderful repository.
Yeah, yeah. Have you talked to Clint Mahan? Who?
Clint Mahan, M-A-C-H-A-N-N. Because Clint was a
student here, I believe, when I came as an
instructor, and now he's a professor. In English?
Yes. Oh, no, I don't know him.
But yes, Stanley was wonderfully sensitive to
just about any matter of decorum, and he always did
the right thing. He was universally liked, too.
What about campus-wide? Were there any people to
whom a young woman could go for help, advice,
guidance?
A lot of women went to all women's hospital. I'm
trying
to think of what women there were there then. And
the only name that comes to mind is Betty
Underburger, and I didn't know her. In the 70s, did
you women faculty members didn't get together, I
gather?
It
didn't seem very relevant to me, so I never really
participated in that. That was years and years
later. There may have been, but I don't remember.
There was a group. department of men who always
drank together. And women were definitely not
invited. And a lot of the department's business
was kind of transacted with these women. And this
was not good. Now, I was not, at this time, a tenure
track member. So it didn't affect me. But there
were, by this time, women tenure track people. And
they greatly attracted to this group. Yes, but
when the women first started
to really increase the numbers, the inequities
were very
physical. The fact that
women did not tend to
be welcome in many of the sciences, and I had
students complain to me about this. They said that
they were in a different part because they just
didn't really miss that in the end. There were so
few women professors.
And
again,
especially
. And when they did have women professors, they
treated them better from what I heard. The two
universities are still very young. I don't know
when.
And
no one really wanted A&M to be tremendously behind
the times, so I would say there was effort made by
the administration to be more in tune with what was
happening other places. I don't know, I don't
recall incidents or individuals that marked I do
know that the core was especially recalcitrant. I
had Melanie Zengraft in class. She was in my
argumentation class, and she was very good.
Please describe her as well as you know her. Well,
this was a long time ago, and she was a very incisive
thinker. She wrote excellent papers. She didn't
ever go overboard in what she did, but she'd always
give kind of bare-bones arguments that were very
cogent.
her papers were always in on time her attitude in
class was good she was assertive without being
aggressive in class
and that was a time there was a time and that was part
of this this was during that time when women tended
to be silent in class did she was not did you ever see
any evidence of anyone any male student uh picking
on her In class? No. I didn't see that. All right.
This is a note to the typist. This will go in as an
editorial note. I was dean of faculties at this
time, and this is the last commencement that I
attended before going in the summer of 1980 to
become the new president at the University of
Texas at El Paso. This is the last commencement in
May of 1980. We then had commencements on Friday
afternoon, Friday night, and Saturday morning.
This is the Saturday morning commencement. NM
students then and now graduate in alphabetical
order by college, by major, and by last name.
Melanie Zentgraf's undergraduate major was
biomedical science, which is the only
undergraduate major in the College of Veterinary
Medicine. So she was the last student, because of
her last name, beginning with the letter Z, from
the last college, and that was the third
commencement. Her family, I learned later, had
thought that we had deliberately rigged it so that
she would be the last of the last of the last. That
part is not true. Our commencement speaker at that
event was William P. Hobby, Jr., the lieutenant
governor, Bill Hobby from Houston, And while the
diplomas are being passed out, Lieutenant
Governor Hobby motioned to me to come up from my
seat on about three rows behind him and sit next to
him. And he told me that when I got out to UTEP to stay
in contact, I should stay in contact with him, that
he would try to help me since we'd known each other
for about 20 years. And he said such marvelous
things as maybe I can help UTEP with a special item
or something or other. As I began to note that we
were about to finish the commencement, I was
starting to get up from my seat and go back to the
back row when I heard some hissing. I turned to him
and said, oh my goodness. He said, what is it? I
said, I don't know, but there are some people out
there hissing, which means they're mad about
something, and particularly the corps members.
And I turned to my right, and I saw that Melanie
Zentgraf was about to come up on the stage. And I
said, oh my goodness, here comes Melanie
Zentgraf. He said, gee, Monique, she's really
pestered me. She's been a pain. She's come over.
She's written letters. She's made... Melanie's
problem was that she had wanted to be on the fish
drill team, in the A&M band, in the Ross
Volunteers, and for all three of those hopes, she
had gotten lame excuses and had been not allowed to
compete for one of those positions. The point of
this editorial note is that within two or three
feet of where I was seated, she came up to receive
her diploma President Jarvis Miller handed it to
her. She took it in her right hand, shifted it to her
left hand, then extended her right hand to him, and
he very quietly said, no way, I'm going to shake
your hand. The lieutenant governor and I and many,
many people in the audience kind of held our breath
and gasped a bit. She then turned to Bob Lacey, the
registrar who was handing the diplomas to
President Miller, being sure that he handed the
right diploma to him at the right time. She
extended her hand to Mr. Lacey, and Mr. Lacey said,
ma'am, I'm not involved in this argument. She then
turned to Don Carter, who was then on the staff of
the registrar, and he said, ma'am, let's keep the
line moving. So she went off stage, and being the
last degree recipient, everyone noticed it.
Paragraph. About six weeks later, when Dr. Miller
was summoned over to a special meeting of the Board
of Regents, He walked in, and they announced to him
that he had been terminated effective that day at 5
o'clock, that he had been terminated as
president. They read him a statement, and the
first thing I understand that they said to him on an
ad lib basis was, you refuse to shake hands with an
Aggie graduate. Melanie Zentgraf is a person
whose role at A&M is symbolically very
important because she did not receive fair
treatment particularly on that day and the person
making this statement learned that you shake
hands with every student and give every student at
least the credit that they deserve. I thought
that's a good one to add there. That's
interesting. Academically, was she a good
student? Yeah, she got an A and without a lot of
work. That class, though, was unusual then in that
there was only one corps member in it. I do remember
that because of this issue. And the other students
seemed to like Melanie. Also, I believe there was
kind of an anti-core feeling in that class, which
she may have had something to do with, but I don't
know. But I just remember this one core guy on the
end seat and Melanie in the front row. We never
discussed issues having to do with the core. It was
an argumentation class, but we discussed gun
control and capital punishment and abortion and
all these other old chestnuts. And then we got into
things like polygraphs and like that, other
topics that I like better because you don't have to
listen to the same old arguments over again. But
she was a good student and she seemed to have the
class's respect and I liked her. As I understand
it, her mother, natural mother and stepmother
both were physically handicapped in terms of
walking and so forth. And their father was a bird
colonel in the Air Force, and therefore she had
grown up in an atmosphere where you ought to be
allowed to achieve everything that you can
achieve so that she wouldn't back down from a
competition.
In the 80s and 90s, how did A&M change? How did the
English department change? How did the campus
change? Okay, I'm trying to kind of link changes to
dates, and I can't. But
when David Stewart took over the headship, he had
this kind of notion of the department as promoting
service, as being a service department
primarily. And he saw, as he put it, cadres of
instructors teaching technical writing. And
most of us didn't like this. Most of us thought this
was a really bad idea. And yet, despite the fact
that this was his vision, it was under his
leadership that...